/*
 * TODO  - CHALLENGES
 * In C, a block is a statement form that allows you to pack a series of
 *  statements where a single one is expected. The comma operator is an
 *  analogous syntax for expressions. A comma-separated series of expressions
 *   can be given where a single expression is expected (except inside a
 *   function call’s argument list). At runtime, the comma operator evaluates
 *   the left operand and discards the result. Then it evaluates and returns
 *   the right operand.
 *
 * Add support for comma expressions. Give them the same precedence and
 *   associativity as in C. Write the grammar, and then implement the necessary
 *    parsing code.
 *
 * Likewise, add support for the C-style conditional or “ternary” operator ?:.
 *    What precedence level is allowed between the ? and :? Is the whole operator
 *    left-associative or right-associative?
 *
 * Add error productions to handle each binary operator appearing without a
 *    left-hand operand. In other words, detect a binary operator appearing at the
 *    beginning of an expression. Report that as an error, but also parse and
 *    discard a right-hand operand with the appropriate precedence.
 *
 */

CHALLENGES
The REPL no longer supports entering a single expression and automatically printing its result value. That’s a drag. Add support to the REPL to let users type in both statements and expressions. If they enter a statement, execute it. If they enter an expression, evaluate it and display the result value.
Maybe you want Lox to be a little more explicit about variable initialization. Instead of implicitly initializing variables to nil, make it a runtime error to access a variable that has not been initialized or assigned to, as in:

// No initializers.
var a;
var b;

a = "assigned";
print a; // OK, was assigned first.

print b; // Error!
What does the following program do?

var a = 1;
{
  var a = a + 2;
  print a;
}
What did you expect it to do? Is it what you think it should do? What does analogous code in other languages you are familiar with do? What do you think users will expect this to do?


DESIGN NOTE: IMPLICIT VARIABLE DECLARATION
Lox has distinct syntax for declaring a new variable and assigning to an existing one. Some languages collapse those to only assignment syntax. Assigning to a non-existent variable automatically brings it into being. This is called implicit variable declaration and exists in Python, Ruby, and CoffeeScript, among others. JavaScript has an explicit syntax to declare variables, but can also create new variables on assignment. Visual BASIC has an option to enable or disable implicit variables.

When the same syntax can assign or create a variable, each language must decide what happens when it isn’t clear about which behavior the user intends. In particular, each language must choose how implicit declaration interacts with shadowing, and which scope an implicitly declared variable goes into.

In Python, assignment always creates a variable in the current function’s scope, even if there is a variable with the same name declared outside of the function.
Ruby avoids some ambiguity by having different naming rules for local and global variables. However, blocks (which are more like closures than like “blocks” in C) in Ruby have their own scope, so it still has the problem. Assignment in Ruby assigns to an existing variable outside of the current block if there is one with the same name. Otherwise, it creates a new variable in the current block’s scope.
CoffeeScript, which takes after Ruby in many ways, is similar. It explicitly disallows shadowing by saying that assignment always assigns to a variable in an outer scope if there is one, all the way up to the outermost global scope. Otherwise, it creates the variable in the current function scope.
In JavaScript, assignment modifies an existing variable in any enclosing scope, if found. If not, it implicitly creates a new variable in the global scope.
The main advantage to implicit declaration is simplicity. There’s less syntax and no “declaration” concept to learn. Users can just start assigning stuff and the language figures it out.

Older statically typed languages like C benefit from explicit declaration because they give the user a place to tell the compiler what type each variable has and how much storage to allocate for it. In a dynamically typed, garbage collected language, that isn’t really necessary, so you can get away with making declarations implicit. It feels a little more “scripty”, more “you know what I mean”.

But is that a good idea? Implicit declaration has some problems.

A user may intend to assign to an existing variable, but may have misspelled it. The interpreter doesn’t know that, so it goes ahead and silently creates some new variable and the variable the user wanted to assign to still has its old value. This is particularly heinous in JavaScript where a typo will create a global variable, which may in turn interfere with other code.
JS, Ruby, and CoffeeScript use the presence of an existing variable with the same name—even in an outer scope—to determine whether or not an assignment creates a new variable or assigns to an existing one. That means adding a new variable in a surrounding scope can change the meaning of existing code. What was once a local variable may silently turn into an assignment to that new outer variable.
In Python, you may want to assign to some variable outside of the current function instead of creating a new variable in the current one, but you can’t.
Over time, the languages I know with implicit variable declaration ended up adding more features and complexity to deal with these problems.

Implicit declaration of global variables in JavaScript is universally considered a mistake today. “Strict mode” disables it and makes it a compile error.
Python added a global statement to let you explicitly assign to a global variable from within a function. Later, as a functional programming style and nested functions became more popular, they added a similar nonlocal statement to assign to variables in enclosing functions.
Ruby extended its block syntax to allow declaring certain variables to be explicitly local to the block even if the same name exists in an outer scope.
Given those, I think the simplicity argument is mostly lost. There is an argument that implicit declaration is the right default but I personally find that less compelling.

My opinion is that implicit declaration made sense in years past when most scripting languages were heavily imperative and code was pretty flat. As programmers got more comfortable with deep nesting, functional programming, and closures, it’s become much more common to want access to variables in outer scopes. That makes it more likely that users will run into the tricky cases where it’s not clear whether they intend their assignment to create a new variable or reuse a surrounding one.

So I prefer explicitly declaring variables, which is why Lox requires it.

CHALLENGES
A few chapters from now, when Lox supports first-class functions and dynamic dispatch, then we technically won’t need branching statements built into the language. Show how conditional execution can be implemented in terms of those. Name a language that uses this technique for its control flow.
Likewise, looping can be implemented using those same tools, provided our interpreter supports an important optimization. What is it, and why is it necessary? Name a language that uses this technique for iteration.
Unlike Lox, most other C-style languages also support break and continue statements inside loops. Add support for break statements.

The syntax is a break keyword followed by a semicolon. It should be a syntax error to have a break statement appear outside of any enclosing loop. At runtime, a break statement causes execution to jump to the end of the nearest enclosing loop and proceeds from there. Note that the break may be nested inside other blocks and if statements that also need to be exited.

DESIGN NOTE: SPOONFULS OF SYNTACTIC SUGAR
When you design your own language, you choose how much syntactic sugar to pour into the grammar. Do you make an unsweetened health food where each semantic operation maps to a single syntactic unit, or some decadent dessert where every bit of behavior can be expressed ten different ways? Successful languages inhabit all points along this continuum.

On the extreme acrid end are those with ruthlessly minimal syntax like Lisp, Forth, and Smalltalk. Lispers famously claim their language “has no syntax”, while Smalltalkers proudly show that you can fit the entire grammar on an index card. This tribe has the philosophy that the language doesn’t need syntactic sugar. Instead, the minimal syntax and semantics it provides are powerful enough to let library code be as expressive as if it were part of the language itself.

Near these are languages like C, Lua, and Go. They aim for simplicity and clarity over minimalism. Some, like Go, deliberately eschew both syntactic sugar and the kind of syntactic extensibility of the previous category. They want the syntax to get out of the way of the semantics, so they focus on keeping both the grammar and libraries simple. Code should be obvious more than beautiful.

Somewhere in the middle you have languages like Java, C# and Python. Eventually you reach Ruby, C++, Perl, and D, languages which have stuffed so much syntax into their grammar, they are running out of punctuation characters on the keyboard.

To some degree, location on the spectrum correlates with age. It’s relatively easy to add bits of syntactic sugar in later releases. New syntax is a crowd pleaser, and it’s less likely to break existing programs than mucking with the semantics. Once added, you can never take it away, so languages tend to sweeten with time. One of the main benefits of creating a new language from scratch is it gives you an opportunity to scrape off those accumulated layers of frosting and start over.

Syntactic sugar has a bad rap among the PL intelligentsia. There’s a real fetish for minimalism in that crowd. There is some justification for that. Poorly designed, unneeded syntax raises the cognitive load without adding enough expressiveness to carry its weight. Since there is always pressure to cram new features into the language, it takes discipline and a focus on simplicity to avoid bloat. Once you add some syntax, you’re stuck with it, so it’s smart to be parsimonious.

At the same time, most successful languages do have fairly complex grammars, at least by the time they are widely used. Programmers spend a ton of time in their language of choice, and a few niceties here and there really can improve the comfort and efficiency of their work.

Striking the right balance—choosing the right level of sweetness for your language—relies on your own sense of taste.


CHALLENGES
Our interpreter carefully checks that the number of arguments passed to a function matches the number of parameters it expects. Since this check is done at runtime on every call, it has a real performance cost. Smalltalk implementations don’t have that problem. Why not?
Lox’s function declaration syntax performs two independent operations. It creates a function and also binds it to a name. This improves usability for the common case where you do want to associate a name with the function. But in functional-styled code, you often want to create a function to immediately pass it to some other function or return it. In that case, it doesn’t need a name.

Languages that encourage a functional style usually support “anonymous functions” or “lambdas”—an expression syntax that creates a function without binding it to a name. Add anonymous function syntax to Lox so that this works:

fun thrice(fn) {
  for (var i = 1; i <= 3; i = i + 1) {
    fn(i);
  }
}

thrice(fun (a) {
  print a;
});
// "1".
// "2".
// "3".
How do you handle the tricky case of an anonymous function expression occurring in an expression statement:

fun () {};
Is this program valid?

fun scope(a) {
  var a = "local";
}
In other words, are a function’s parameters in the same scope as its local variables, or in an outer scope? What does Lox do? What about other languages you are familiar with? What do you think a language should do?



chapter 11

CHALLENGES
Why is it safe to eagerly define the variable bound to a function’s name when other variables must wait until after they are initialized before they can be used?
How do other languages you know handle local variables that refer to the same name in their initializer, like:

var a = "outer";
{
  var a = a;
}
Is it a runtime error? Compile error? Allowed? Do they treat global variables differently? Do you agree with their choices? Justify your answer.
Extend the resolver to report an error if a local variable is never used.
Our resolver calculates which environment the variable is found in, but it’s still looked up by name in that map. A more efficient environment representation would store local variables in an array and look them up by index.

Extend the resolver to associate a unique index for each local variable declared in a scope. When resolving a variable access, look up both the scope the variable is in and its index and store that. In the interpreter, use that to quickly access a variable by its index instead of using a map.

chapter 12

CHALLENGES
We have methods on instances, but there is no way to define “static” methods that can be called directly on the class object itself. Add support for them. Use a class keyword preceding the method to indicate a static method that hangs off the class object:

class Math {
  class square(n) {
    return n * n;
  }
}

print Math.square(3); // Prints "9".
You can solve this however you like, but the “metaclasses” used by Smalltalk and Ruby are a particularly elegant approach. Hint: Make LoxClass extend LoxInstance and go from there.
Most modern languages support “getters” and “setters”—members on a class that look like field reads and writes but that actually execute user-defined code. Extend Lox to support getter methods. These are declared without a parameter list. The body of the getter is executed when a property with that name is accessed:

class Circle {
  init(radius) {
    this.radius = radius;
  }

  area {
    return 3.141592653 * this.radius * this.radius;
  }
}

var circle = Circle(4);
print circle.area; // Prints roughly "50.2655".
Python and JavaScript allow you to freely access an object’s fields from outside of its own methods. Ruby and Smalltalk encapsulate instance state. Only methods on the class can access the raw fields, and it is up to the class to decide which state is exposed. Most statically typed languages offer modifiers like private and public to control which parts of a class are externally accessible on a per-member basis.

What are the trade-offs between these approaches and why might a language prefer one or the other?
DESIGN NOTE: PROTOTYPES AND POWER
In this chapter, we introduced two new runtime entities, LoxClass and LoxInstance. The former is where behavior for objects lives and the latter is for state. What if you could define methods right on a single object, inside LoxInstance? In that case, we wouldn’t need LoxClass at all. LoxInstance would be a complete package for defining the behavior and state of an object.

We’d still want some way to reuse behavior across multiple instances. Since there are no classes, we’ll let a LoxInstance delegate directly to another LoxInstance to reuse its fields and methods, sort of like inheritance. The end result is a simpler runtime with only a single internal construct, LoxInstance.

Users would model their program as a constellation of objects, some of which delegate to each other to reflect commonality. There are no longer classes. Instead, individual objects that are delegated to represent “canonical” or “prototypical” objects that others refine.

That’s where the name “prototypes” comes from for this paradigm. It was invented by David Ungar and Randall Smith in a language called Self. They came up with it by starting with Smalltalk and following the above mental exercise to see how much they could pare it down.

Prototypes were an academic curiosity for a long time, a fascinating one that generated interesting research but didn’t make a dent in the larger world of programming. That is until Brendan Eich crammed prototypes into JavaScript which then promptly took over the world. Many (many) words have been written about prototypes in JavaScript. Whether that shows that prototypes are brilliant or confusing—or both!—is an open question.

Including more than a handful by yours truly.
I won’t get into whether or not I think prototypes are a good idea for a language. I’ve made languages that are prototypal and class-based, and my opinions of both are complex. What I want to discuss is the role of simplicity in a language.

Prototypes are simpler than classes—less code for the language implementer to write, and fewer concepts for the user to learn and understand. Does that make them better? We language nerds have a tendency to fetishize minimalism. Personally, I think simplicity is only part of the equation. What we really want to give the user is power, which I define as:

power = breadth × ease ÷ complexity
None of these are precise numeric measures. I’m using math as analogy here, not actual quantification.

Breadth is the range of different things the language lets you express. C has a lot of breadth—it’s been used for everything from operating systems to user applications to games. Domain-specific languages like AppleScript and Matlab have less breadth.
Ease is how little effort it takes to make the language do what you want. “Usability” might be another term, though it carries more baggage than I want to bring in. “Higher-level” languages tend to have more ease than lower-level ones. Most languages have a “grain” to them where some things feel easier to express than others.
Complexity is how big the language is (and its runtime, core libraries, tools, ecosystem, etc.). People talk about how many pages are in a language’s spec, or how many keywords it has. It’s how much the user has to load into their wetware before they can be productive in the system. It is the antonym of simplicity.
Reducing complexity does increase power. The smaller the denominator, the larger the resulting value, so our intuition that simplicity is good is valid. However, when reducing complexity, we must take care not to sacrifice breadth or ease in the process, or the total power may go down. Java would be a strictly simpler language if it removed strings, but it probably wouldn’t handle text manipulation tasks well, nor would it be as easy to get things done.

The art, then is finding accidental complexity that can be omitted. Language features and interactions that don’t carry their weight by increasing the breadth or ease of using the language.

If users want to express their program in terms of categories of objects, then baking classes into the language increases the ease of doing that, hopefully by a large enough margin to pay for the added complexity. But if that isn’t how users are using your language, then by all means leave classes out.